Apple
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the fruit. For the technology company, see Apple Inc.. For other
uses, see Apple (disambiguation).
"Apple tree" redirects here. For other uses, see Apple tree (disambiguation).

Apple

A typical apple
Scientific classification
Kingdom:	Plantae
(unranked):	Angiosperms
(unranked):	Eudicots
(unranked):	Rosids
Order:	Rosales
Family:	Rosaceae
Subfamily:	Maloideae or Spiraeoideae[1]
Tribe:	Maleae
Genus:	Malus
Species:	M. domestica
Binomial name
Malus domestica
Borkh., 1803
The apple is the pomaceous fruit of the apple tree, species Malus domestica in the ro–
se family (Rosaceae). It is one of the most widely cultivated tree fruits, and the most
widely known of the many members of genus Malus that are used by humans. Apples grow on
small, deciduous trees. The tree originated in Western Asia, where its wild ancestor,
Malus sieversii, is still found today. Apples have been grown for thousands of years in
Asia and Europe, and were brought to North America by European colonists. Apples have
been present in the mythology and religions of many cultures, including Norse, Greek a–
nd Christian traditions. In 2010, the fruit's genome was decoded, leading to new unders–
tandings of disease control and selective breeding in apple production.
There are more than 7,500 known cultivars of apples, resulting in a range of desired –
characteristics. Different cultivars are bred for various tastes and uses, including in
cooking, fresh eating and cider production. Domestic apples are generally propagated by
grafting, although wild apples grow readily from seed. Trees are prone to a number of
fungal, bacterial and pest problems, which can be controlled by a number of organic and
non-organic means.
About 69 million tonnes of apples were grown worldwide in 2010, and China produced al–
most half of this total. The United States is the second-leading producer, with more th–
an 6% of world production. Turkey is third, followed by Italy, India and Poland. Apples
are often eaten raw, but can also be found in many foods (especially desserts) and dri–
nks. Many beneficial health effects have been found from eating apples; however, the se–
eds are slightly poisonous and two forms of allergies are seen to various proteins found
in the fruit.